Add soft constraint analysis (unresolved/resolved SoC constraints) to scheduling job results (#2072)
FlexMeasures/flexmeasures: documentation/features/scheduling.rst

Reviewer: Hm, maybe this more high-level section for schedule inspection really belongs on top of your new, more detailled section "Accessing constraint results".

.. note:: Currently, the ``ProcessScheduler`` uses only the ``consumption-price`` field of the flex-context, so it ignores any site capacities and inflexible devices.

The schedule
------------

> A schedule produced by FlexMeasures is a series of power values for each flexible device (represented by its power sensor), covering the scheduling window at the scheduling resolution.

Reviewer: We should add a high-level example here - given that we talk only about unresolved targets for the rest of the section.

First, let's say that we schedule a site 123 with four assets, each with a power sensor - sensors 1 through 4. Sensors 1 and 2 are for inflexible power series, e.g. PV and building consumption. Sensors 3 and 4 represent flexible power series, e.g. a battery and an EV charger.

- The user would trigger a schedule computation for the site asset (mention the POST endpoint to trigger an asset schedule using ID 123)
- The user can then ask for the scheduled power series of the two flexible assets, via their power sensor IDs (mention the two GET endpoints, using sensor IDs 3 and 4).
- Once scheduling is done, these endpoints return the asset's power schedule, ~plus~ **while the `[GET] /api/v3_0/jobs/{uuid}` endpoint gives** information about unmet targets.

Also, an example is nice (what does a schedule result look like?)
The example from the PR description is nice, but we should re-order fields (I did that below already) and also fill in small examples for the values, start, duration fields:

```
Example GET /api/v3_0/sensors/1/schedules/<uuid> response (The scheduled asset is a battery - one SoC minimum was violated):

{
  "scheduler_info": {"scheduler": "StorageScheduler"},
  "values": [...],
  "start": "...",
  "duration": "...",
  "unit": "kW".
  "scheduling_result": {
    "unresolved_targets": {
      "42": {
        "soc-minima": {
          "datetime": "2024-01-01T10:00:00+00:00",
          "unmet": "260.0 kWh"
        }
      }
    },
    "resolved_targets": {}
  },
}
``` 

Values, start, duration and unit should be first in the dict, though, and we should explain them first.

The schedule
------------

A schedule produced by FlexMeasures is a series of power values for each flexible device (represented by its power sensor), covering the scheduling window at the scheduling resolution.

For detailed constraint analysis (unmet and resolved constraints), use the ``GET /api/v3_0/jobs/<uuid>`` endpoint, which provides structured information about constraints organized by asset. See the :ref:`scheduling_constraint_results` section below for details.

.. _scheduling_constraint_results:

Accessing constraint results
-----------------------------

When a schedule is computed for a device with state-of-charge constraints, FlexMeasures analyzes whether the constraints can be met.

Use the **jobs endpoint** (``GET /api/v3_0/jobs/<uuid>``) to retrieve detailed constraint analysis for all assets involved in the scheduling job, organized by asset ID.
This endpoint is useful when you want to inspect constraint violations without retrieving the full schedule.

The constraint results distinguish between:

> - **Unmet constraints**: Soft constraints that could not be satisfied during optimization.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Constraints that were **unmet**: Soft constraints that could not be satisfied during optimization.
```

> - **Resolved constraints**: Soft constraints that were satisfied with some margin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Resolved constraint **margins**: Soft constraints that were satisfied with some margin.
```

Each constraint result includes:

- ``datetime``: ISO 8601 UTC timestamp when the constraint was tightest (for resolved constraints) or first violated (for unmet constraints).

> - ``unmet`` (unmet only): Magnitude of the violation (shortage for minima, excess for maxima).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- ``value`` (unmet only): Magnitude of the violation (shortage for minima, excess for maxima).
```

> - ``margin`` (resolved only): Headroom remaining at the tightest point.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- ``value`` (margins only): Headroom remaining at the tightest point.
```

Example: Constraint results from a battery scheduling job
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Suppose you schedule a battery device (asset ID 42, SoC sensor ID 17) with the following constraints:

- **soc-minima**: Battery must stay above 10 kWh
- **soc-maxima**: Battery must not exceed 100 kWh

> If the optimization cannot satisfy the minimum constraint at 10:30 UTC (falling short by 260 kWh),

Reviewer 2: 260 kWh short is weirdly short for a minimum of 10 kWh. Let's say the soc-minima is 60 kWh and we are short 20 kWh.

but does satisfy the maximum constraint with a 40 kWh margin at 12:00 UTC,
the constraint results would show:

**Response via GET /api/v3_0/jobs/<uuid>:**

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "result": {
            "unmet": [
                {
                    "asset": 42,
                    "sensor": 17,
                    "soc-minima": [
                        {
                            "datetime": "2024-01-15T10:30:00+00:00",

>                             "unmet": "260.0 kWh"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                            "value": "20.0 kWh"
```

                        }
                    ]
                }
            ],

>             "resolved": [

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            "margins": [
```

                {
                    "asset": 42,
                    "sensor": 17,
                    "soc-maxima": [
                        {
                            "datetime": "2024-01-15T12:00:00+00:00",

>                             "margin": "40.0 kWh"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                            "value": "40.0 kWh"
```

                        }
                    ]
                }
            ]
        },
        "status": "PROCESSED",
        "message": "Scheduling job processed successfully",

>         "scheduler_info": {"scheduler": "StorageScheduler"}

Reviewer 2: These are not part of the response.

Other fields are.

    }

Interpreting constraint results for optimization decisions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**When constraints are all met:**

An empty ``unmet`` array indicates successful optimization.

> However, check the ``margin`` values in ``resolved`` to understand how tight the constraints were:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, check the values in ``margins`` to understand how tight the constraints were:
```

> - Large margins (e.g., 500 kWh) suggest the device has significant flexibility headroom.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Large margins (e.g., 50 kWh) suggest the device has significant flexibility headroom.
```

- Small margins (e.g., 5 kWh) indicate the constraints were nearly violated.
- Zero margin would mean the device hit the exact constraint limit.

*Use case*: If you see very small margins, you may want to relax constraints or provide additional flexibility to create a more robust schedule.

**When constraints are unmet:**

Unmet constraints indicate the optimization problem was over-constrained. Common causes:

> - Insufficient device capacity to meet all constraints within the planning horizon.

Reviewer 2: Remove
```suggestion
```

> - Conflicting constraints (e.g., a very high minimum and a very tight planning window).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Conflicting constraints, such as a high minimum on too short notice.
```

> - Inflexible demand patterns preventing the device from reaching desired states.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Insufficient headroom within the grid capacity, caused by inflexible devices.
```

The ``unmet`` values tell you how much shortfall exists:

- For ``soc-minima`` violations: The shortage in kWh. The device could not charge enough.
- For ``soc-maxima`` violations: The excess in kWh. The device could not discharge enough.

> *Use case*: If a battery is reporting 260 kWh shortage for a planned trip, you may need to:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*Use case*: If a battery is reporting 20 kWh shortage for a planned trip, you may need to:
```

> - Extend the planning horizon to allow more time for charging.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Allow more time for charging.
```

- Install a larger battery.
- Reduce the minimum SoC requirement.

> - Use external charge points.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Stretch the minimum SoC requirement over a longer time period (using the ``duration`` field) to continue charging in case the user plugs out later than expected.
- Warn the user about the shortfall.
```

**When no constraints are defined:**

> If ``unmet`` and ``resolved`` are both empty, no state-of-charge constraints were set,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If ``unmet`` and ``margins`` are both empty, no state-of-charge constraints were set.
```

> or the device has no state-of-charge sensor configured.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

   ``POST /api/v3_0/assets/123/schedules/trigger``.
   The endpoint returns a job UUID, e.g. ``"5d28df1b-9f16-4177-ae43-6e750d80fad3"``.

2. **Retrieve the scheduled power series** for the flexible devices once scheduling is done,
   via ``GET /api/v3_0/sensors/3/schedules/<uuid>`` and ``GET /api/v3_0/sensors/4/schedules/<uuid>``.
   Each response contains the power setpoints for that device:

   .. code-block:: json

       {
           "values": [0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 0.0],
           "start": "2024-01-15T08:00:00+00:00",
           "duration": "PT4H",
           "unit": "kW"
       }

3. **Retrieve constraint analysis** for all flexible assets via ``GET /api/v3_0/jobs/<uuid>``.
   The ``result`` field in the response shows whether the state-of-charge targets for sensors 5 and 6 could be met, and by how much.
   For a finished ``StorageScheduler`` job, ``result`` is always an object with ``unresolved`` and ``resolved`` constraint analysis (as shown below);
   both arrays are simply empty when the flex model defines no ``soc-minima``/``soc-maxima``, or when a scheduler other than ``StorageScheduler`` was used.

The constraint results distinguish between:

> - Constraints that were **unresolved**: Soft constraints that could not be satisfied during optimization, with the shortfall or excess reported as their **violation**.

Reviewer: I notice that all violations are given in absolute numbers. They are either a "shortfall" or a "excess", depending on context. On the other hand, for resolved constraints only one term is used ("headroom").

I would at least explicitly document that both violations and margins are always positive numbers.

I wonder if developers would expect to have shortfalls be negative?

- Small margins (e.g., 5 kWh) indicate the constraints were nearly violated.
- Zero margin would mean the device hit the exact constraint limit.

*Use case*: If you see very small margins, you may want to relax constraints or provide additional flexibility to create a more robust schedule.

**When constraints are unresolved:**

Unresolved constraints indicate the optimization problem was over-constrained. Common causes:

- Conflicting constraints, such as a high minimum on too short notice.
- Insufficient headroom within the grid capacity, caused by inflexible devices.

The ``violation`` values tell you how much shortfall exists:

- For ``soc-minima`` violations: The shortage in kWh. The device could not charge enough.
- For ``soc-maxima`` violations: The excess in kWh. The device could not discharge enough.

*Use case*: If a battery is reporting 20 kWh shortage for a planned trip, you may need to:

- Allow more time for charging.
- Install a larger battery.
- Reduce the minimum SoC requirement.
- Stretch the minimum SoC requirement over a longer time period (using the ``duration`` field) to continue charging in case the user plugs out later than expected.

> - Warn the user about the shortfall.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Warn the user about the shortfall.
- If the battery is in an EV, charge en-route.

```

**When no constraints are defined:**

If ``unresolved`` and ``resolved`` are both empty, no state-of-charge constraints were set.

.. note:: Hard constraints (``soc-targets``) are never reported in results because the scheduler enforces them strictly by definition.
          If a hard constraint cannot be met, the entire scheduling job will fail, not produce results with violations.

> We believe the two schedulers (and their flex-models) we describe here are covering a lot of use cases already.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Work on other schedulers
---------------------------------------

We believe the two schedulers (and their flex-models) we describe here are covering a lot of use cases already.
```

This header went missing.
